---
layout: page  
title: Vintage Sparce PCA on Earth Microbiom Project Data  
tags: [tutorial]
permalink: /blog/
category: blog
---
In this blog post, we will apply Vintage Sparse PCA (vsp) on the microbiome data collected from the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) to explore the microbiome patterns worldwide.  

1. Data description  
Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) uses a systematic approach to characterize microbial taxonomic and functional diversity across different environments and humankind (Thomson et al., 2017).  EMP comprises 27,751 samples from 97 studies with microbial data representing 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, metagenomes, and metabolomics. For this blog, we used a rarefied subset data composed of 2,000 samples representing all environments and humankind microbiomes created by EMP. The dataset is divided by (1) an operational taxonomic unit (OTU) table, (2) and sample table, and (3) a metadata table. Below is the column information for each table.  

(1) OTU table: ID, Sequence, Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus, and Species.  
(2) The sample table contains ID and Sample Name.  
(3) Metadata table: 76 environmental information from each sample. For this blog, we used Sample ID, Environment Biome, and Environment Feature.  

2. Data manipulation   
To represent the biomes as a graph, we built an OTU-sample bipartite adjacency matrix, named A. For this, we used the R Matrix package.  Aij = x  was composed by OTUs as i, samples as j, and the number of OTUs observed in the sample as x. The dimensions of the A matrix was 155,002 rows and 2,000 columns. To examine the A matrix, we did a histogram and found that some OTUs were more abundant than the other, which is natural in microbial ecosystems.  

3. Clustering Microbiome into communities  
We used Vintage Sparse PCA (vsp) to cluster samples into 20 communities using the R vsp package. It is expected that sample sites with a similar beta-diversity (i.e. consists of similar numbers of specific OTUs) will be clustered together. The vsp function requires an adjacency matrix, the number of factors to be calculated, and whether to center/scale or not. As we hope to estimate the beta's in Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model, we will do vsp with centered and scaled adjacency matrix. Further, we will examine several diagnosis plots to check the vsp result.  


